# Softnet Free
Softnet Free is an open source communication platform for autonomous devices with embedded TCP/IP stack. The platform provides inter-device networking environment that allows clients to interact with autonomous devices through the Internet. Softnet offers four communication protocols to use in the development - TCP and UDP in dynamic IP environments, Remote Procedure Calls and Application Events, along with two powerful mechanisms - Access Control and Service Status Detection. As a comprehensive solution, Softnet also offers a set of tools for managing IoT projects, services, clients, users, permissions, contacts, and device sharing with other people/organizations. The latter allows owners to establish user-to-user or business-to-customer relationships. Using Softnet, the developers can concentrate on the IoT application’s logic without concerning about networking issues.  

Softnet Free is licensed under GNU GPL v3 or any later version. You can use, modify and distribute the server software and client libraries without any restrictions. We’ll be glad if you participate in the further development and improvement of the project.

As of June 2023, the [Softnet client library](https://github.com/Softnet-Free/softnet-java/) is available in Java SE 1.7. It works on Linux platforms, Raspbian, Android 5.0 and later versions. The client libraries for other platforms are under development. First of all, we are targeting widespread 32bit microcontrollers (STM32, PIC32, etc.) from leading manufactories such as STMicroelectronics, Microchip Technology, NXP, Texas Instruments, Infineon, etc.  

If you want to learn more about the Softnet platform, the following sources will be helpful:

* [Softnet Programming Model (Java)](https://softnet-free.github.io/softnet-java/) / This guide describes the process of developing IoT applications using Softnet Java Library;
* [The Developer’s Guide to Softnet ASN.1 Codec (Java)](https://softnet-free.github.io/asn1codec-java/) / This guide provides the specification for the API of the Softnet ASN.1 Codec (Java). As an option, Softnet allows you to use the ASN.1 DER format to transfer data over the network, although you can use any other format, such as JSON;
