Softnet Free is an IoT communication platform for devices with embedded TCP/IP stack. It implements a software-defined networking environment that enables direct communication between devices. Softnet makes the TCP and UDP protocols available for use in dynamic IP environments. The platform offers Remote Procedure Calls and Application Events as additional IPC mechanisms. The latter is used in event-driven interaction scenarios. The Softnet mechanism of Access Control can be used to implement different levels of access to devices, and a mechanism called Service Status Detection provides clients with information about the connectivity status of remote devices. Softnet also provides a convenient solution for managing devices, clients, user permissions, and shared access to devices with other individuals/organizations. The latter allows owners to establish user-to-user or business-to-customer relationships. Using Softnet, developers can focus on IoT application logic without concerning about networking issues.  

Softnet Free is licensed under Apache License, Version 2.0. You can use, modify and distribute the server software and the endpoint libraries without any restrictions. We’ll be glad if you participate in the further development of the project.

As of June 2023, the Softnet endpoint library is available in Java SE 1.7. It works on Linux platforms, Raspbian, Android 5.0 and later versions. The endpoint libraries for other platforms are under development. First of all, we focus on FreeRTOS, ChibiOS/RT and other RTOS platforms widely used in industrial microcontrollers such as STM32, PIC32, EFR32, Infineon XMC, TI SimpleLink, ESP32, etc.;

## Resources for developers

1. **Softnet MS**. This is a management system used for managing devices and clients utilizing the Softnet platform. "[The User Guide to Softnet Management System](https://softnet-free.github.io/softnet-ms/)" is a guide to Softnet MS designed for both developers and users.

2. **Softnet Endpoint Library (Java)**. This section provides resources related to the Softnet endpoint library written in Java.

* [Softnet Endpoint Library (Java)](https://github.com/Softnet-Free/softnet-java/) / This is a repo for the Softnet endpoint library written in Java SE 1.7. It works on Linux platforms, Raspbian, Android 5.0 and later versions;  

* [Softnet Programming Model in Java](https://softnet-free.github.io/softnet-java/) / This guide explains the process of developing applications using **Softnet Endpoint Library (Java)**;  

* [Softnet ASN.1 Codec (Java)](https://github.com/softnet-free/asn1codec-java) / This is a repo for the Softnet ASN.1 codec written in Java. Softnet uses it to represent data in the ASN.1 DER format for transmitting over a network. This tool can also be used to encode/decode application data for transmitting over a network, although you can use any other format, such as JSON;

* [The Developer Guide to Softnet ASN.1 Codec (Java)](https://softnet-free.github.io/asn1codec-java/) / This guide explains how to use **Softnet ASN.1 Codec (Java)** in the application development;

## A brief description of the platform

In recent years, TCP/IP-enabled embedded systems have been increasingly used in industrial automation as well as consumer electronics. Modern embedded systems, constructed even on low-cost microcontrollers, can be powerful enough to implement on-device business logic for autonomous operation, interact with the physical environment, and communicate with clients over IP networks. However, the communication model required for interacting with such devices over the Internet is entirely different from that used to communicate with stationary Internet services. At first glance, establishing connections within a dynamic IP environment seems to be the most challenging task in this model. IoT developers are good at GPIO programming, but don't really like to go deep into solving complex TCP/IP networking tasks. In fact, along with connectivity, there are a number of other communication tasks that we’ll consider a little later.  

Typically, device manufacturers use cloud platforms to provide networking capabilities for their products. In addition, a cloud platform can store application data, apply analytics to the data, and use artificial intelligence to take decisions. Suitable platforms may already exist for some popular IoT applications, such as platforms for controlling drones over 4G networks. But new ideas in IoT are born all the time, while the development of a communication platform is a complex and expensive task. This can be a major barrier for start-ups, small-scale manufacturers and Do-It-Yourself developers.  

The good news is that the communication tasks we are talking about can be organized, structured, and implemented within a single, unified platform. This platform could be used on its own, as well as integrated into application-specific cloud platforms or run as a service with a unified API to serve other platforms that require networking capabilities for embedded systems. These considerations form the basis of the Softnet Free concept.  

Let’s see what Softnet Free offers to developers and users.  

**Software-Defined Network**. Unlike a typical database-driven Internet service, an embedded system connected to the Internet provides access to the resources of an electromechanical device. Usually these resources are quite limited, hence the networked device has a rather limited set of clients. It is assumed that each client must be approved by the device owner and assigned certain access rights. Softnet implement this idea via an abstraction called Site. It serves as a framework that establishes a software-defined network (SDN) with an enclosed address space. The device owner creates a site to set up one or multiple identical devices. The devices are represented on the site as services with identical interfaces. An IoT project can contain multiple sites for different types of services. The device consumers, in turn, set clients on sites that host the services they want to consume. Each site runs on a Softnet server and ensures communication between clients and services through the SDN established by the site. The site synchronizes states of the endpoints, communicates commands between them, controls the authority of users and associated clients, manages the endpoint accounts, receives events from the devices and delivers them to the clients, transmits RPC requests and responses, assists in establishing TCP and UDP connections (in peer-to-peer or proxy mode), etc. It should be noted that TCP and UDP connections pass outside of the SDN.  

**Devices Administration**. As a rule, an electronic device connected to the Internet may require administration from time to time. This can involve configuring the device parameters, as well as managing user accounts and their permissions. If you have just a few of such devices, you can manage them with no efforts. However, device administration becomes complicated if you have a large number of devices. Softnet provides a centralized management system to manage IoT projects, each consisting of multiple sites for various devices. For all devices in the project, the platform allows to have a single user registry and assign them permissions to access various devices.  

**Partnerships**. The term social network is usually associated with Facebook or other similar networks where users can share articles, videos and other resources. But electronic devices connected to the Internet can also be thought of as resources that owners may have a need to share with partners. Softnet has a mechanism for establishing partnerships with individuals and organizations registered on the same Softnet server as you. You can send and accept contact invitations, manage the contact list, create project users associated with the contacts, and assign them access rights for your devices.

**TCP and UDP in a dynamic IP environment**. Almost any application layer protocol uses TCP or UDP as a transport protocol. However, if the remote device is situated behind firewalls and/or NATs, it may become unreachable for clients to establish transport layer connections. There is also an IPv4/IPv6 inter-stack communication issue. Softnet solves these issues behind the scene. A client simply requests the platform to establish a connection. If the remote device authorizes the request, the platform establishes the connection in P2P mode, and if this is not possible, then in proxy mode and returns the connected sockets to the client and the remote device. Embedded applications running on devices listen for TCP/UDP connection requests on virtual ports. Bindings to fixed physical ports aren't used. This approach ensures reliable protection against Brute-Force and DDoS attacks on the devices. Softnet also supports IPv4/IPv6 inter-stack connections for both TCP and UDP protocols without the need for special IPv4/IPv6 transition equipment.  

**Remote Procedure Calls**. Due to limited resources, some industrial microcontrollers may not be able to communicate using standard application layer protocols. In such a case, Softnet offers to use a built-in RPC mechanism. The procedure parameters and return value are in ASN.1 format, which allows for compact representation of complex hierarchical data. Softnet provides developers with a convenient tool called Softnet ASN.1 Codec to work with ASN.1 format.  

**Application Events**. In IoT, interaction with a remote device is often triggered by an event on that device, which is called an event-driven interaction. This is the fundamental mechanism in M2M applications that operate autonomously without human intervention. Softnet supports the pub/sub eventing model, where publishers are devices and subscribers are clients, respectively. This topic is described in more detail in “[The concept of Softnet Free / Application Events](https://github.com/orgs/Softnet-Free/discussions/2/#application-events)”.  

**Access Control**. This is one of the most required features in the IoT realm. Softnet offers developers two types of access control – Plain Access Control (PAC) and Role-Based Access Control (RBAC). In case of PAC, any consumer added to the site will have a full access to the devices on the site. You can also choose it if your IoT application is assumed to use its own access control mechanism. In case of RBAC, an embedded application provides the site with a list of roles that the device owner can assign to the consumers centrally through the management panel. The embedded application, in turn, uses these roles in the definitions of access rules to RPC procedures, events, and listeners on TCP and UDP virtual ports. When a client request comes to the embedded application running on the device, the platform finds the corresponding membership user and determines if the client have enough rights to make this request.  

**Service Status Detection**. A networked device may lose the connectivity from time to time. Clients waiting to communicate with the device require to be notified when the device goes online. Clients should also be able to check the online status of the remote device before making a request to it. In Softnet, this functionality is called Service Status Detection. Along with the online/offline status, Softnet provides clients with additional information about the remote device, such as the name and ID of the device, and the version of the interface that the device implements.

<!--

**Here are some ideas to get you started:**

🙋‍♀️ A short introduction - what is your organization all about?
🌈 Contribution guidelines - how can the community get involved?
👩‍💻 Useful resources - where can the community find your docs? Is there anything else the community should know?
🍿 Fun facts - what does your team eat for breakfast?
🧙 Remember, you can do mighty things with the power of [Markdown](https://docs.github.com/github/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/basic-writing-and-formatting-syntax)
-->
